# Project Title: ID and Co. Limited Pioneer Staff Schedule Management Using Basic Excel Functions

## Table of Contents
[Project Overview](#project-overview)

[Data Sources](#data-sources)

[Tool Used](#tool-used)

[Data Analysis Process](#data-analysis-process)

### Project Overview:
---
This project involves creating an efficient and organized schedule for the pioneer staff of ID and Co. Limited using basic Excel functions. The primary goal is to streamline staff scheduling and improve data management practices within the company. The project leverages fundamental Excel features, including data cleaning, sorting, filtering and essential functions to optimize the scheduling process.

### Data Sources
---
The data utilized in this project was generated by the faclitator for instructional purposes and reflects hypothetical staff details. The data was designed to simulate real world scheduling scenerios, allowing for practical application of Excel functions.

### Tool Used 
---
- Microsoft Excel [Download Here](https://www.microsoft.com)
  1. For Data Cleaning and Preparation
  2. For Analysis
  3. For Visualization
 
###  Data Analysis Process
---

- Data Import:
  This include bringing in data into Excel from different sources
  
- Data Cleaning and Preparation:
This includes handling duplicates, blank cells and text manipulation and extration using functions like
1. **`TRIM`**: Removes extra spaces from text entries.
2. **`UPPER`**: Standardizes text to uppercase.
3. **`LOWER`**: Standardizes text to lowercase.
4. **`PROPER`**: Capitalizes first letter of each word.
5. **`LEFT`**: Extracts a specified number of characters from the start of a text string.
6. **`MID`**:  Extracts a specified number of characters from a text string, starting at a specified position.
7. **`RIGHT`**: Extracts a specified number of characters from the end of a text string.
8. **`FIND`**: Returns the position of a specific character within a text string.

- Data Transformation: This involve structuring data into table by using **`ctrl+T`** shortcut

- Data Analysis Techniques: This involve using analytical functions to derive insights from data. Functions include;
  **`SUM`**, **`AVERAGE`**, **`MAX`**, **`COUNT`**, **`LARGE`**, **`SMALL`**, **`IF`** *etc*.

  ```Excel
  |EMPLOYEE NUMBER| SALARY| DEPARTMENT| GENDER |              
  | KP15865       | 645765| Finance   |        |
  | KP45681       | 234678| Sales     |        |

  |EMPLOYEE NUMBER| GENDER| DATE_OF_BIRTH|
  | KP15865       | MALE  | 01/15/2001   |
  | KP45681       | FEMALE| 16/06/1999   |
  
  =SUM(B1:B2)
  =VlOOKUP(KP15865,A1:C2,2,TRUE)
  ```

- Data Summarization: create summaries using **`Pivot Tables`** making it easier to identify patterns or issues.

- Data Visualization: Using of charts and graphs to visualize data insights.



